# Quality Assurance

## Ozonation - an important part of food safety. What is it?

Ozone is a naturally occurring form of oxygen with the molecular formula
O₃. It forms in the upper atmosphere when electricity in the form of
lightening passes through the air, briefly changing oxygen (O₂) to ozone
(O₃). Ozone is a powerful sanitiser that can be manufactured using
oxygen and electricity. Many water treatment plants use ozonation to
sterilise water. The Croziers use the ozonation method to sterilize the
water into which they dip their freshly prepared turkeys. If any harmful
microorganisms are present they are instantly killed by ozonation. This
is the preferred method for sterilizing poultry. Other poultry
manufacturers use a chlorine (bleach) dip that not only sterilizes but
also whitens and affects the taste of the final product. Ozone leaves no
chemical by-products, tastes or smells in poultry.

![Lesley Christensen-Yule, Chef](/img/quality-assurance.jpg)

Lesley Christensen-Yule, Chef

From the farm to the freezer: Reasons why you can be sure that Crozier's
Turkeys are safe to eat.

## The Croziers use a Risk Management Program (RMP)

This is a Certified Food Safety Programme which ensures that every stage
of the turkey production is assessed for food safety risks. Controls are
put in place throughout processing and these are regularly checked by
independent Food Safety Officers.

## Crozier's Turkeys live outside and roam freely (free-range)

This means they are not subject to the rapid spread of disease that can
occur when birds are reared closely together in larger commercial
operations. The birds are regularly inspected for sign of disease. The
harsh Canterbury frosts are effective in killing many harmful
micro-organisms that might be present in the outdoor environment.

## The Croziers practice crop rotation

This traditional farming practice keeps the soil healthy without
depleting the necessary nutrients and micro-organisms of the earth. This
keeps the environment healthier for turkey growth and development.

## Crozier's Turkeys are processed by hand

Unlike large commercial operations, the risk of cross-contamination is
reduced when processed by hand. When an item of machinery is
contaminated in a large-scale manufacturing process, the contamination
is quickly passed onto other birds in the production
line.

## Crozier's Turkeys are dipped into [ozonated water](#ozonation) during processing

This ensures that if there are any harmful micro organisms present, they
are killed on
contact.

## Crozier's Turkeys are [snap-frozen](#quality-control) soon after processing.

This means that micro-organisms are not given the chance to infect or
grow in the freshly processed turkey. Also the quick freezing process
ensures that the moisture in the meat cells freezes as very small
particles. This is important when the meat is thawed as very little
moisture is lost from the meat. In contrast, meat that is frozen slowly
develops large ice particles that break cell walls and allow moisture to
escape when the meat is thawed.

## Why are Crozier's Turkeys only available frozen?

### Seasonal productivity

When raised in a natural environment, turkey is a seasonal product. In
order to supply year-round fresh turkey, some producers grow their
turkeys in artificial environments, controlling and extending their
breeding cycles. The Croziers prefer to stick to traditional methods,
allowing their turkeys to breed in season and to hatch over the summer
months. This means that turkeys required for Christmas must be processed
at the beginning of the year (end of the New Zealand summer). In New
Zealand turkeys are most in demand at Christmas time.

### Quality control

All turkeys leaving the Crozier farm have reached the same high standard
of quality. Kept frozen, their quality is maintained. There is no
significant difference in quality between a fresh turkey and a
snap-frozen one.

## Crozier's Turkeys are packaged in shrink-wrap

Shrink wrapping (vacuum packaging) ensures that air is forced out of the
packaging which then clings closely to the turkey so that there is no
room for ice or cold air to cause freezer burn, a drying out of the
flesh that leaves patches of stringy coarse meat.

