# Preparation

![Turkey being sliced](/img/preparation.jpg)

After the Croziers have done everything to ensure the food safety of
your turkey, it's your job to make sure that you thaw, prepare, cook and
serve it in a safe manner.

## Thawing (defrosting) frozen turkey

Frozen turkey must be completely thawed before cooking. The safest
method is thawing in the refrigerator. To do this you need to plan
ahead.

## Thawing Methods

### Strongly recommended: Thawing in the Refrigerator

Leave the turkey in its original wrapping and place it in a deep tray at
the bottom of the refrigerator. The tray and its positioning are both
important because they eliminate the risk of raw turkey juices escaping
and dripping onto other foods. Allow 10 hours per kilogram. A 4.5 kg
turkey takes approximately 45 hours (nearly 2 days) to thaw in a
standard refrigerator at a temperature of 4Â°C.

### Use only if time is short: Thawing in cold water

Place turkey in its original wrapping in sink and cover with COLD water.
Never use hot water because it creates enough warmth in the turkey to
encourage bacterial growth. Change the cold water every half-hour to
maintain the cold temperature. Allow 1 hour per kilogram to defrost the
turkey. A 4.5 kg turkey will take approximately 5 hours to thaw.

### NOT RECOMMENDED: Thawing in the microwave

Microwave ovens do not heat evenly, creating warm patches that may
encourage bacterial growth in large items such as turkeys.

**Once your turkey has thawed, remove the bag of giblets from inside the
cavity. Set them aside for use in [stuffing](#cooking--recipes) or
[giblet gravy](#cooking--recipes). Sprinkle some salt inside the cavity
and then rinse out.**

## Handling

Whenever handling raw poultry, it is important to practice both strict
personal hygiene and kitchen hygiene.

## Personal hygiene

Wash and thoroughly dry hands before and after handling raw turkey.
Example: after handling raw poultry, wash and dry your hands before
touching other foods or equipment.

## Kitchen hygiene

After preparation, wash, sterilise (with boiling water) and dry food
preparation equipment such as bench surfaces, chopping board, knives
that have been in contact with the raw food. Contamination can occur if
cooked food comes into contact with equipment that has been used for raw
food.

